🐧 Linux Module — Quick Revision Notes
1. Linux and its distributions
Linux is an open-source operating system widely used in cybersecurity.
- Linus Torvalds: Developed the Linux kernel.
- Richard Stallman: Started the GNU project.
- Distribution (distro): A version of Linux containing the kernel, utilities, package management tools, an installer, and often preinstalled applications.
Common Linux distributions
Distribution	Main use / characteristic
Kali Linux	Penetration testing and digital forensics
Ubuntu	User-friendly, general computing and cloud environments
Parrot	Security tools, penetration testing and forensics
Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL)	Enterprise use; subscription-based support
AlmaLinux	Community-driven, enterprise-focused Linux distribution
Remember these relationships:
- Ubuntu → Debian-derived
- Kali Linux → Debian-derived
- Parrot → Debian-derived
- AlmaLinux → Created as a stable alternative to CentOS
Security tools mentioned
Tool	Purpose
Metasploit	Vulnerability testing and exploitation
Burp Suite	Web application security testing
John the Ripper	Password recovery and password auditing
tcpdump	Command-line network packet analysis
Wireshark	Graphical network traffic analysis
Autopsy	Digital forensics for storage devices
Suricata	Network threat detection and analysis
Key definitions
- Penetration testing: Simulated attacks to identify vulnerabilities.
- Digital forensics: Collecting and analyzing evidence to understand what happened during or after an incident.
Use security tools only on systems you're authorized to test. VMs are useful for isolated labs, although they aren't perfectly secure.

2. Linux architecture
The six components covered in your course:
Component	Function
User	Initiates tasks
Applications	Programs that perform specific tasks
Shell	Interprets commands entered by the user
FHS	Organizes the locations of files and directories
Kernel	Manages processes, memory and hardware resources
Hardware	Physical components of the computer
Important terms
- FHS (Filesystem Hierarchy Standard): Defines how directories and files are organized.
- Directory: A location that organizes files and other directories.
- Package: A unit of software that contains files needed to install software, including dependencies where required.
- Package manager: A tool for installing, managing and removing software packages.
- Multi-user system: A system that allows multiple users to use its resources.
Hardware revision
- CPU: Executes program instructions.
- RAM: Temporary working memory; its contents are lost when power is turned off.
- Hard drive/storage: Stores files and programs long-term.
- Peripheral devices: Examples include the keyboard, mouse, monitor and printer.

3. Linux distributions and package management
Different distributions use different package-management systems.
Distribution family	Package format	Tools
Debian-derived (Ubuntu, Kali, Parrot)	.deb	dpkg, APT
Red Hat-derived	.rpm	RPM, YUM
What's the difference between APT and dpkg?
- APT: A higher-level package-management tool that searches for, installs and removes packages, and handles dependencies through configured repositories.
- dpkg: Works directly with Debian package files (.deb) and performs lower-level package operations.
- YUM: A package-management tool used with Red Hat-derived systems.
Commands you practised
apt
sudo apt install suricata
sudo apt remove suricata
sudo apt install tcpdump
apt list --installed


Command	What it does
apt	Displays APT usage information
sudo apt install package	Installs a package
sudo apt remove package	Removes an installed package
apt list --installed	Lists installed packages
What you did in the lab:
1. Checked that APT was installed.
2. Installed Suricata.
3. Verified that Suricata ran.
4. Removed Suricata and verified its removal.
5. Installed tcpdump.
6. Listed installed packages.
7. Reinstalled Suricata and confirmed that both packages were installed.
Why use sudo? It runs a command with elevated privileges when authorized, which are generally required for system-wide package installation and removal.
Security takeaway: Keep software updated when possible because updates can contain bug fixes and security patches.

4. The Linux shell
The shell is a command-line interpreter that allows you to communicate with the operating system using commands.
Think of it as a translator between you and the system.
Shell types
- Bash: Bourne-Again Shell
- csh: C Shell
- ksh: Korn Shell
- tcsh: Enhanced C shell
- zsh: Z Shell
Your course primarily uses Bash, which is widely used in cybersecurity.
Different shells can have different features and prompts, but they support many common Linux commands.
How a command works
User enters command
        ↓
      Shell
        ↓
Interprets the command
        ↓
System performs the requested task
        ↓
Output or error is returned


The shell is an interface to the OS, not the kernel itself.

5. Input, output and errors
When you use the shell, communication generally involves three important concepts.
Term	Meaning	Example
Standard input (stdin)	Information supplied to a program	Typing into the terminal
Standard output (stdout)	Normal output produced by a program	hello
Standard error (stderr)	Error messages produced by a program	Command not found
Commands you practised
A. echo — display text
echo hello
echo "hello"
echo "Example text"


Output:
hello


Quotation marks can group text together, especially when it contains spaces or characters the shell might otherwise interpret specially.
B. expr — perform basic calculations
expr 32 - 8


Output:
24


More examples:
expr 3500 \* 12
expr 25 + 15
expr 20 / 4


Important:
- Put spaces between numbers and operators.
- Escape * as \* in Bash so it is passed to expr as a multiplication operator.
- expr performs integer arithmetic; division discards the fractional part.
C. clear — clear the terminal screen
clear


This clears the visible terminal output. It does not delete your files or erase your command history.
Error example
eco hello


Because eco is misspelled, Bash typically reports that the command cannot be found.

6. Quick cybersecurity connections
Why does all this matter for your career?
- Linux distributions: Help you choose the right environment and tools.
- APT and dpkg: Let you install and manage security software.
- Bash: Lets you automate tasks and work efficiently.
- tcpdump and Wireshark: Help you investigate network traffic.
- Suricata: Helps detect suspicious network activity.
- Standard output and errors: Help you understand whether commands succeeded.
- Digital forensics: Helps establish what happened during an incident.